---
layout: page
title: Contexts
subtitle: An introduction to McPherson Library, MS.Span.1
---

Medieval manuscripts, often not in display in the public eye, offer rich historical, cultural, and technical fields of study. While there are various reasons why such manuscripts are frequently kept in special areas of a library or someplace secure or hidden somewhere else, other factors that might hinder the accessibility of a text include the ability to read (or decipher) medieval handwriting and the ability to understand the language in which the text was written. In general, the physical or electronic accessibility of a text currently poses less of a problem than its textual/linguistic accessibility, simply because it is only a matter of going to the relevant establishment to examine the physical object; in cases where the materiality of the text matters less, digital surrogates (e.g. digital facsimiles or editions) offer viable substitutes for the object itself. However, these surrogates often do not serve their purpose when the reader is unable to read or understand the text. One manuscript codex that considers these factors as potential complications for the modern reader is Victoria, McPherson Library, MS.Span.1. 

Acquired by University of Victoria Special Collections and Archives in 2015 through its regular Special Collection acquisition fund, MS.Span.1 is a sixteenth-century manuscript (ca. 1528-1530) containing a revised Rule of the Franciscan Third Order Regular in Spanish. The text of MS.Span.1 is written in a very fine Iberian Gothic Rotunda bookhand,  mainly in the Spanish vernacular with the occasional Latin. No known copies of the same text of MS.Span.1 are now known to exist, nor has the text of MS.Span.1 ever before been printed or edited.  There is a need to make this resource more accessible to the public. Similar projects have endeavoured the same by leveraging the advantages of information sharing afforded by digital environments. Danielle Grant observes in her thesis that considers how the remediation of the manuscript Harley 4205 as a digital facsimile increases accessibility to the book that “[t]he digital environment allows information to be stored, linked, and engaged with in a style that print technologies cannot achieve so effectively.”  Owing to the current lack of scholarship on the Franciscan Third Order Regular Rule and a lack of publicity on the existence of this renewed Rule,  this project establishes a foundational resource for MS.Span.1, which can be used by the University of Victoria for reference and be made available future researchers. 

Central to making the text of MS.Span.1 more accessible in this project is the creation of an open access digital edition of the manuscript that comprises of its digital facsimile, transcription, and translation into English, including a concise version of this introduction and the bibliography, all of which is to be hosted online in GitHub Pages.  Like Grant’s thesis, this project is a work of remediation, which Jay Bolter and Richard Grusin define as “the way in which one medium is seen by our culture as reforming or improving upon another (59), and the formal logic by which new media refashion prior media forms” (273). Thus, this digital edition of MS.Span.1 aims to improve upon the accessibility of the text in two main ways, namely (1) to reproduce the text such that its visual information is retained in its digital version and (2) to assist the modern reader with their interactions with the medieval text.  All of the components of this project that I mentioned work together to accomplish this enhanced reading experience. 
