---
layout: page
title: Conventions
subtitle: Guidelines for transcribing and translating MS.Span.1
---

## A note on transcription
Transcription conventions follow, where appropriate, those outlined by David MacKenzie in _A Manual of Manuscript Transcription for the Dictionary of Old Spanish Language_, as revised and expanded in the 5th ed. by Ray Harris Norhill (Madison, 1997), as well as by Raymond Clemens and Timothy Graham in _Introduction to Manuscript Studies_ (Ithaca, 2007), pp. 75-77.

The transcription is a semi-diplomatic one; that is, it attempts to reflect the manuscript text and appearance as accurately as possible while also using minor adjustments for ease of reading. For example, I have expanded scribal abbreviations and normalized the space between words. In an effort to reproduce this text as closely to its manuscript state as possible, however, I retain the scribe’s capitalization, punctuation (or lack thereof), line breaks, paraph marks, indentations, and rubrication, and I have made no attempt to revise or modernize the existing text or its orthography. Where spelling variation or scribal errors appear in the manuscript, I have not corrected nor standardized them. All expanded abbreviations present are indicated with parentheses.

With the exception of the cursive title written on the binding, this manuscript is written in an Iberian Gothic Rotunda bookhand, with rubricated text divisions and the occasional decorated initial at the beginning of chapters or major manuscript groupings. These decorative elements structure the book and serve to draw readers’ attention to section and chapter divisions, presumably for ease of use and as finding aids.

The legibility and regularity of the scribe’s handwriting in MS.Span.1 and its clear formal structure allowed relatively easy access the text; the process would have been more laborious, for instance, with a text comprised of variable letter forms like those of typical semi-cursive Elizabethan Secretary hands. This, in turn, guided how I chose to structure the remediated work: in my transcription, I have elected to maintain the folio divisions by enclosing the folio numbers—and indicating if the side is recto or verso—in square brackets, to allow the modern reader to easily cross-reference the transcription to the very legible manuscript itself.
<br>
<hr>
## A note on translation
This project aims to make the text of the MS.Span.1 more accessible for those who are primarily working in the English language. While it is commonly a best practice for a full translation to approximate the format and layout of the source text, I present the translation as flush-left and ragged-right (unlike the transcription, which endeavours to present the text as it appears in the manuscript, line-by-line): the even spacing between words (as opposed to their unevenness in a justified—flush-left and flush-right—alignment of text) and the ragged-right alignment “emphasizes the end, not the beginning, of the line” (Bringhurst 24), thereby signalling a more natural space for the reader’s eyes to rest before moving on to the next line and resolving word divisions that otherwise (in the manuscript) are difficult for modern readers to manage. The appearance of the translated text ought to suggest, as Robert Bringhurst puts it, a “continuous unruffled flow of justified prose” (23), unlike the text of the transcription, which strives for a “perpetual symmetry \[with\] … or something in between?” (23) the text and its original artefact and therefore can give the reader the impression of being constantly interrupted. This typographical choice of presenting the translated text flush-left and ragged-right, even though it is a subtle one, increases the text’s readability through the clarification of its order and structure.

Spanish, as a null-subject language, usually does not require the use of a pronoun because the subject is encoded in the verb conjugation. The pronoun would already express a number, person, and/or gender agreement with the verb it refers to, thereby rendering it redundant. In MS.Span.1, the scribe frequently omits such pronouns, and it pertains to the task of the translator to supply or clarify these pronouns in the translated text in order to accomplish a full translation. In instances where a full or literal translation is not possible, notes or clarifications are inserted within square brackets. Such notes are explanatory in nature and may, for instance, supply missing or unclear pronouns or clarification of referents buried under multiple subordinating clauses.

Folio numbers enclosed in square brackets remain, as they do in the transcription, to indicate where the text begins and ends on each leaf of the manuscript. Material features that affect the text, such as loss of folios (e.g., between folios 17v and 18r) are noted by ellipses within the translation.

To further improve the readability of the translated text, I have also chosen to organize it such that it sounds a more natural Modern English. That is, the syntax, spelling, capitalization, and the use of possessives have all been adjusted according to Modern English conventions. I have also opted to omit catchwords—the words copied at the bottom of the folio that ends each quire, to guide the binder—in the translated version of the text. In instances where it would be beneficial to a modern reader, I have added punctuation marks—which rarely exist in MS.Span.1—according to Modern English conventions.
<br>
<br>
### Translation of Bible verses
I have elected to modernize and standardize the translation of Bible verses using the Douay-Rhiems version (DRB), an early modern Catholic (and literal) translation of the Latin Vulgate, the Bible that the scribe of MS.Span.1 would have known and been accustomed to reciting and quoting.

While other versions of the Bible such, as the popular King James Version (KJV), might sound more familiar to modern readers, especially those in English literary studies, the KJV is more poetic and was intended to conform to the ecclesiology of the Church of England. It is thus a less appropriate choice for this project, given that the text of MS.Span.1 was produced in Catholic Spain for a Catholic order. Where accurate translation of a Bible passage from does not conform to DRB, I have kept or slightly altered latter (e.g., omitted one word from the verse because it is not used in MS.Span.1) to keep the translation consistent.
<br>
<br>
### Translation of archaic Spanish vocabulary and Latin or Latinate phrases
Naturally, MS.Span.1 includes a plethora of archaic Spanish words and usages unfamiliar to the modern reader. For example, the words “gradera” (doorkeeper, fol. 17r), “buriel” (a brown woolen cloth, fol. 17v), and “red” (a window or door railing, fol. 18r) do not have modern equivalents. Moreover, the scribe frequently employs contractions such as “ca” (“because” or “since”), “so” (“on,” “about,” or “above”), and “suso” (“aforementioned”). Although these words and abbreviations were commonly used in sixteenth-century Spanish from this region, the scribe uses them without any evident rationale (except in instances relating to space constraints) and without any indication that they are contractions; that is, they appear in the manuscript without any of the paleographical abbreviation marks that usually suggest that a word has been abbreviated or contracted. The absence of these marks presents a challenge to the modern reader—not so much in the transcription, but especially in grappling with the translation of the text—in that these words require the reader to first parse the sentence (which could be lengthy in some instances) in order to determine which syntactic role the word in question fulfills, or to consider the context surrounding that sentence as an aid to translation.

While almost all of MS.Span.1 is in the Spanish vernacular, the scribe also copied and employed Latin with some frequency. Code switching from Spanish to Latin without indication or script change is not uncommon in the text. Many of the Latin words used emerged from religious or legal contexts—for example, _item_ (“in like manner” or “also”) and _ad perpetuam_ (“everlasting” or “permanently”) are repeated frequently, subtly emphasizing the official nature of this Rule—though Latin quotation of papal bulls, Bible verses, and prayers are also included.

In the translation, I italicize words translated from Latin for ease of identification, with the exception of words that retain their Latinate spelling and use in English today. For example, the Lord’s Prayer (i.e., the “Our Father”) appears in the manuscript as Latin _Pater Noster_; however, I retain the common noun “Paternoster” still in use in Modern English, so that the translated text stays close to the original text wherever possible.
<br>
<br>
<hr>
### Works Cited
- Bringhurst, Robert. _Elements of Typographical Style_. 2nd ed. Vancouver: Hartley and Marks, 1997.
- Clemens, Raymond, and Timothy Graham. _Introduction to Manuscript Studies_. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 2007.
- MacKenzie, David. _A Manual of Manuscript Transcription for the Dictionary of the Old Spanish Language_. Madison: Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Studies, 1984.
