---
layout: page
title: Project Overview
subtitle: Remediating a Medieval Spanish manuscript
---

Medieval manuscripts, often not in display in the public eye, offer rich historical, cultural, and technical fields of study. While there are various reasons why such manuscripts are frequently kept in special areas of a library or someplace secure or hidden somewhere else, other factors that might hinder the accessibility of a text include the ability to read (or decipher) medieval handwriting and the ability to understand the language in which the text was written. In general, the physical or electronic accessibility of a text currently poses less of a problem than its textual/linguistic accessibility, simply because it is only a matter of going to the relevant establishment to examine the physical object; in cases where the materiality of the text matters less, digital surrogates (e.g. digital facsimiles or editions) offer viable substitutes for the object itself. However, these surrogates often do not serve their purpose when the reader is unable to read or understand the text. One manuscript codex that considers these factors as potential complications for the modern reader is Victoria, McPherson Library, MS.Span.1. 

Acquired by University of Victoria Special Collections and Archives in 2015 through its regular Special Collection acquisition fund, MS.Span.1 is a sixteenth-century manuscript (ca. 1528-1530) containing a revised Rule of the Franciscan Third Order Regular in Spanish. The text of MS.Span.1 is written in a very fine Iberian Gothic Rotunda bookhand,  mainly in the Spanish vernacular with the occasional Latin. No known copies of the same text of MS.Span.1 are now known to exist, nor has the text of MS.Span.1 ever before been printed or edited.  There is a need to make this resource more accessible to the public.

Similar projects have endeavoured the same by leveraging the advantages of information sharing afforded by digital environments. Danielle Grant observes in her thesis that considers how the remediation of the manuscript Harley 4205 as a digital facsimile increases accessibility to the book that “\[t\]he digital environment allows information to be stored, linked, and engaged with in a style that print technologies cannot achieve so effectively.”  Owing to the current lack of scholarship on the Franciscan Third Order Regular Rule and a lack of publicity on the existence of this renewed Rule,  this project establishes a foundational resource for MS.Span.1, which can be used by the University of Victoria for reference and be made available future researchers. 

Central to making the text of MS.Span.1 more accessible in this project is the creation of an open access digital edition of the manuscript that comprises of its digital facsimile, transcription, and translation into English, including a concise version of this introduction and the bibliography, all of which is to be hosted online in GitHub Pages.  Like Grant’s thesis, this project is a work of remediation, which Jay Bolter and Richard Grusin define as “the way in which one medium is seen by our culture as reforming or improving upon another (59), and the formal logic by which new media refashion prior media forms” (273). Thus, this digital edition of MS.Span.1 aims to improve upon the accessibility of the text in two main ways, namely (1) to reproduce the text such that its visual information is retained in its digital version and (2) to assist the modern reader with their interactions with the medieval text.  All of the components of this project that I mentioned work together to accomplish this enhanced reading experience. 
<br>

### Why remediate?
This project is a work of remediation, and it thus pays particular attention to the effectiveness of the use of a different medium to achieve the goal of improving the accessibility of MS.Span.1’s text for those primarily working in the English language. The following are some questions that emerged as I developed the digital edition of the manuscript:
- By changing the medium of the text, was the project able to achieve what I had intended it to do?
- What does making a text to be read and understood tell me about its politics and aesthetics?
- Did I gain or lose something in the process? If so, what are these gains and/or losses?

These lines of inquiry inform my critical aim of testing the relevance of the various choices I made and the conventions I followed throughout this project.

While the digital environment cannot fully reproduce or represent the materiality of a medieval manuscript, it nevertheless presents various affordances for manipulating the latter’s visual and textual elements. For example, the digitized images of the manuscript can be virtually cut, copied, and pasted for the purpose of reproducing them, and their high-resolution allows them to be magnified or color-corrected for the purpose of making their minute features more visible.

Additionally, applying more advanced forensic techniques in the analysis of this manuscript might also aid in the identification of its provenance and ownership history, which is otherwise difficult to know while relying only on its physical capabilities. Although the manuscript in some ways loses its materiality (e.g., the relative importance of its physical survival, the feel of its parchment) as it becomes digitized, it also gains the quality of dynamism as it enters a new digital materiality. The digitized manuscript becomes more flexible and can be manipulated to suit the modern reader’s various needs: despite the original manuscript’s static fragility and rarity, its digital reproduction is stripped of these limitations and becomes a robust commodity. Thus, one no longer needs to worry about the damaging the original; the remediated text is available for use and consumption indefinitely.

Creating a new way to access a text inevitably tests the relevance of the remediated text’s design, as a measure of its effectiveness in delivering the desired outcome of improving readability. As I mentioned above, for instance, the transcription conventions I have followed aim to assist the modern reader through the ability to cross-reference the text of the transcription to that of the original manuscript. There are several features gained as a result of this transcription and digital presentation: abbreviations and contractions are expanded, folio numbers are added to indicate where the text begins in its now-comparable original, letter forms become more legible, spacing is standardized, and the text takes up comparatively less space on the page than in its original form.

Although efforts were made to follow the layout of the original manuscript, however, several features were also lost in the processing of the text: any scribal marks pertaining to an abbreviation or contraction, decorations around the page of the manuscript or on initial letters and capitals, and even the grace of the scribe’s skilled bookhand—all of which indicate that the text was produced laboriously and meticulously by human intention and intervention—are absent or at least less apparent.

As in the creation of the digital facsimile, the material (the parchment, the binding, the smell of it) is lost in the transcription. But we are left with familiar letter forms which allow us to focus more on the text itself. The remediated medieval manuscript, in a digital state, thus becomes an invitation to read, use, and understand the past, the text, and even the object itself by those who might otherwise never encounter it.
